# The Art of Pricing Pt. 2

![](media/image9.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.6902777777777778in"}

### Start with Supply

The danger of this "build it and they will come" approach is that it
often encourages people to build businesses that never attract
customers. Time and again we find entrepreneurs who make large sunk
investments, certain that customers will want their product, only to
find that a market never existed.

### Starting with the Customer

How you have chosen your customer, your primary sunk investment, and the
"units" you produce and deliver, will be the difference between success
and failure. Unit Economics is a framework to help you make the very
best choices possible. An entrepreneur once defined profit as
"over-recovered" fixed cost. In Unit Economics, you learn to correctly
define the sunk investments and fixed costs your venture will require.
Then you will see if you are likely to attract enough customers who will
buy enough "units" at a high enough price to make the investment
worthwhile. And you will learn to do all of this before you make the
sunk investment.

### Bridging the Gap Between Demand and Supply

An entrepreneur matches a set of needs with the specifications for a
product that satisfies that need. The glue that holds these two "units"
together is the benefit you offer to the customer when using your
product---a product that must be better, faster, or cheaper than any
other way of satisfying that need. The combination of the "unit of
desire" inside the customer, the "unit of production" given to the shop
foreman, and the benefit the customer gets from using the product,
successfully bridges the gap and forms the foundation of your business.
This is the framework of unit economics.

### Demand: Customers, Prices, and Volumes

You always start with a customer need and what the customer is willing
to pay to satisfy it. But this answer is too simple. You cannot survey
every customer, ask them what they want, and customize a solution. The
cost of discovery and customization is too great. You need to find a
group of customers with relatively homogeneous needs.

### How do you determine a price?

1.  **Quantify the maximum value your customer places on your product**.

    This is the highest possible price you could charge (because no one
    would buy it after that).

2.  **Measure your costs per unit.**

    (Costs can vary depending on volume, but we'll get to that later.
    For now, choose a volume and measure cost per unit at that volume).
    The difference between the max value and the cost per unit is the
    "shared value," because it's the total value of the product that
    must get divided up between you and the customer.

3.  **Decide how much of the shared value you want to keep to yourself
    and how much you will give to the customer.**

    Your price will be based on how much value you want to keep and
    concede. All of this works beautifully, until one little problem
    arises: a competing product or substitute of the same value starts
    selling for less. With no apparent difference in the value received
    by the customer, no customer will pay more for your product. So your
    new ceiling price is the price of the substitute. Decide again how
    much shared value you want to offer the customer and how much you
    want to keep, and you've determined your new price.

![](media/image10.tiff){width="5.658536745406824in"
height="3.5287248468941383in"}

#### Value

But how does a customer decide on the value of a product? Value is
judged in the mind of an individual. The maximum price a customer will
pay is set inside the mind of each consumer as they make subjective and
sometimes irrational tradeoffs between the money they have, the
intensity of the desires they wish to satisfy,

![](media/image11.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.2729166666666667in"}

#### The Mistake of Using Costs to Set Prices

Many people use a "cost-plus" approach to pricing because it is easier
to calculate the costs of production than to crawl inside the heads of
your customers to measure their whims. That is why this note started
with you stumbling onto an empty pipeline, and why so many people take a
"build it and hope they will come" approach. But setting prices based on
costs is a mistake. If costs lead you to price below what your customers
are willing to pay, you may give away too much value to the customer. If
costs lead you to price above what your customers are willing to pay,
you will not sell a single unit, and all of your costs will truly be
"sunk." Basing prices on costs can cause you to miss a lucrative
opportunity.

### What is a Primary Sunk Investment?

A primary sunk investment is:

• The most important investment a company makes to satisfy its chosen
set of customers.

• Either the largest investment the company makes or the asset that
would be the most expensive to duplicate.

• A process or asset that allows a company to do the most important
tasks again and again in the most efficient way possible to deliver
exactly what the customer will pay for.

• The single most important investment to: (1) invent a new product or
create a new product; (2) attract customers; (3) manufacture a product;
or (4) deliver a product. 15 It typically serves every customer in the
same way.

![](media/image12.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.685416666666667in"}

## Summary

Unit economics is about making sunk investments---primary sunk
investments---where you are confident you can "over-recover" the
investment to make a profit. When you start your business, it is
critical to have defined your primary sunk investment, and the "units"
its standardized process is designed to deliver. You must understand
that the key attributes of these "units of production" are critical for
satisfying the "units of desire" in your subset of customers, how many
of these customers are likely to buy and what price they will pay. You
then can calculate the variable and fixed period costs required to
attract, make, and deliver these units, and how long it will take to
recover your primary sunk investment and other start-up costs. All of
business---from water pipelines to theme parks---is a matter of making
and recovering sunk investments in a standardized set of processes. If
you are clear about the "units" you are selling, and the primary sunk
investment you have made, the chances are much higher that you will
"over recover" your fixed and sunk costs and survive.