# Intro to Cash & Valuation Tools

<span class="underline">The overarching question of the Cash and
Valuation course is</span>: How do you make the right investment,
operational, and financial decisions to maximize the value of your firm
and your equity in it?

<span class="underline">Entrepreneurs need to do three things
well:</span>

1.  sell to customers

2.  make and deliver products or services

3.  count the cash that’s left over at the end of the day

The Cash and Valuation Framework provides the questions you need to make
investment, operational, and financial decisions that will maximize the
value of the firm and your equity. The Framework is broken into two
major parts: 

**1. Adding value to your business**

  - Making incremental investments

  - Creating a more complex business model

  - Adding financing

**2. Knowing when to sell.**

![](./media/image45.png)

**In a way, the progression of the C\&V framework mirrors the evolution
of a business:**

1.  As an entrepreneur, you’ll first make sunk investments for assets
    like machinery and commitments to fixed period costs like rent to
    get the business started. You will be eager to reach cash flow
    breakeven and payout as soon as possible.

2.  As the business grows, you may offer customer credit or add
    inventories or make new expenditures to grow, all of which create a
    more complex business model.

3.  Once the business model is proven, you may want to add debt to lower
    your cost of capital;

4.  If you have outside investors or run a public company, you’ll need
    to use financial statements to report economic reality to outsiders;
    and

5.  One day, if someone offers you a market price that’s more than you
    believe the business is worth, you may sell the business.

**Cash Flow Tools**

The most powerful way to visualize the attractiveness of a business is
to project the amount of cold, hard cash the business will produce over
time. An entrepreneur calls these cash flows.

**Valuation Tools**

Cash flows show you the story of the business’s cash over time. The
valuation tools in the C\&V Framework allow you to calculate the value
of a given business opportunity.

**Defining Value**

Value = Cash + Risk + Time

**Sahlman’s Four Rules of Cash:**

1\) More cash is better than less cash.

2\) Cash sooner is better than cash later. 

3\) Less-risky cash is better than more-risky cash. 

4\) Never run out of cash.

**The Free Cash Flow to the Firm (FCFF) tool**

will allow you to compare different scenarios of revenue, investments,
and costs forecasts by visualizing how each decision will affect the
amount of cash your business will create over time.

**Intrinsic Firm Value**

measures the value of the firm you have created, based on the FCFF
discounted for the time value of money and risk.

**Free Cash Flow to the Equity (FCFE) models**

show how much free cash flow is left over for equity holders after
interest and principal payments to debtors have been paid.

**Intrinsic Equity Value**

the value of the equity based on your free cash flow to the firm
projections, is calculated by deducting the market value of the debt
from the intrinsic firm value

**Four Key Principles for the Cash and Valuation Course:**

1.  **Focus your analysis on counting real customers and tangible
    products.**
    
    Act like a financial detective, using the questions and tools in
    this framework to decipher what is happening on the factory floor or
    within the sales force. Count products and customers. Learn to think
    of inventory not as a number on a balance sheet but envision it as
    piles of raw materials or semi-finished goods stacked on the factory
    floor. Imagine accounts receivable as individual IOUs written by
    customers.

2.  **Always begin with adding value to one customer at a time.**
    
    Start every analysis by determining how you add value, one customer
    and one sale at a time. The early questions and tools in this
    framework work best for simple businesses, but they also are the
    critical first steps for analyzing a highly complex business. You
    must master the simple tools and skills first before moving to the
    more complex.

3.  **Be clear about which question you are asking before you reach for
    a financial tool.** Often students will learn one financial tool and
    try to use it, no matter what the circumstances. The cash flow
    modeling and valuation tools presented in the course are each
    designed to answer specific questions. Do not choose an analytical
    tool until your goals and the question you are asking is crystal
    clear.

4.  **Decide how much weight to put on historical data to drive
    forecasts.**
    
    Projections require data. You either can forecast results based on
    trends in historical data from financial statements or from a
    bottom-up projection based on the customers, processes, and expected
    competitive environment in your business (unit economics). Your
    approach will likely depend on the quality of the data you have and
    whether you expect imbedded trends to continue or change.

**The Goal:** The main goal of the Cash & Valuation Framework is to help
you make the firm and your equity in it as valuable as possible, by
building an economic model for your business that is as attractive as
possible and can be executed by you in the real world.

