# Making Tradeoffs in Operations

**Making Tradeoffs in Operations The link between continuous improvement
and sustainable profits**

Here’s a sobering statistic: 70% of newly formed businesses fail in the
first ten years1 . But you probably knew that, right? So many
would-be-entrepreneurs launch with a “build it and hope they will come”
approach that almost always dooms them to failure. Of the 70% of early
failures, many fall into this category.

But here’s an even more sobering statistic: of the 30% of businesses
that do survive, 95% of the surviving entrepreneurs find themselves in a
self-employment trap; working longer hours and earning less money than
if they worked for someone else. Many of the entrepreneurs who do manage
to attract customers wear themselves out, because they never build the
processes required to maintain a self-sustaining business.

The purpose of this note is to elevate you into the 1.5% of businesses
that become self sustaining, and quite often grow into large and
valuable firms. To enter this elite group, you need to develop the habit
of thinking of your business as a series of simple processes. You should
always be measuring, improving and making the necessary small tradeoffs
to serve your customers better than the competition.

**Summary**

Welcome to the world of faster, better and cheaper. Every time you find
a way to improve a process to make a product faster, better or cheaper
that doesn’t require tradeoffs in other areas, you should take it. And
with practice and diligence you’ll find many small ways to do this that,
in the end, add up to large advantages over competitors.

So here are three basic rules to make improving operations easier:

1\. Always search for “free improvements” in time, quality or cost, even
if they are hard to find. That means every minute of downtime you should
be looking for clever ways to perfect a technique or standardize a
process.

2\. If a tradeoff is involved, you must measure the costs and benefits
in partnership with your customers. In a sense, you must negotiate with
them to say which tradeoffs are appealing.

3\. Since these negotiations soon become too complex and burdensome,
that means you usually will default to prioritize one of the goals of
time, cost or (clearly defined) quality as most important, another as
less important and the last as least important. In other words, it’s
possible to lower costs, as long as you accept a few tradeoffs in (less
important) time and more tradeoffs in (least important) quality.
