# Searching for the Mythical Numbers Guru

<span class="underline">The overarching financial question for running
your own entrepreneurial business is</span>: How do you maximize the
long-term value of your equity while minimizing the risk of running out
of cash while accurately reporting the results to outside parties?

**Why Can’t You Just Hire a Numbers Guru?**

So why can’t you just hire a “numbers guru” to handle all the financial
issues? This sounds appealing—until you realize that there are four
distinct numeracy skills that you need to run a business and that few
“financial gurus” are experts in more than one of these areas.
Financial gurus come in one of four basic flavors:

  - Auditors, who measure historical expenditures so you can reward the
    right employee behaviors and accurately report your results to third
    parties

  - Controllers, who project how changes in prices, sales volume, and
    fixed-period and variable costs will affect profits and (more
    importantly) free cash flows

  - Tax experts, who know how to use the intricacies of Internal Revenue
    Code to minimize tax bills

  - Money raisers, who persuade equity investors or banks to advance
    funds

You, as the entrepreneur, must understand the basics in each of these
areas so that you can ask the right questions to ensure you do not have
an auditor, a controller, a tax expert, or a money raiser in the wrong
position, leading you down a path to ruin.

**Learning the Hard Way “On the Job”**

As an entrepreneur, you have to stand between the sales department and
the operations department to make difficult choices about which
customers to serve, which process to use to serve them, and what prices
to charge. Solving the financial challenges you will face will require a
combination of financial accounting, cost accounting, tax, and
money-raising skills, so you cannot delegate them to someone who has
only mastered one set of tools. Numeracy is the ability to use numbers
to solve a problem in a business. You can pick these skills up through
on-the-job experience, with the caveat that you may bankrupt a company
in the process. Below is a description of how you can expect your
financial literacy to develop if you decide to learn at the “school of
hard knocks.”

**You have three choices when it comes to numeracy:**

1)  You can avoid numerical literacy by sticking to small, cash-based
    businesses and grow them slowly, so unit economics is the only tool
    you will need.

2)  Or you can learn the lessons the hard way, risking bankruptcy if you
    lose track of the connection between operating decisions,
    profitability, and free cash flows to equity, a danger that
    increases the more quickly you grow or the more heavily you finance
    with debt.

3)  Or finally, you can put in the effort now to practice applying the
    tools of finance, first with simpler businesses and then with
    more-complex ones until you can run multiple scenarios to choose the
    one that adds the most value with the least risk.

**Never forget that your key objective in building a business is making
the tough operating decisions that maximize the value to you and the
other equity holders, while minimizing the risk of running out of cash.
If you are ever confused, default to Sahlman’s four rules of cash.**

  - The key to making smart financial decisions is asking the right
    questions, questions that can be answered from the data you have
    available. Unit economics may suffice early in the life of a
    business. Later on, when production processes, sales funnels, and
    cash cycles become more complex, you will need unlevered free cash
    flow to the firm to accurately project free cash flows.

  - Free cash flows to the firm and intrinsic firm value come before
    intrinsic equity value and free cash flows to equity. Free cash
    flows to the firm depict cash flow projections for the whole pie and
    intrinsic firm value is the discounted present value of the whole
    pie. You must bake the pie before you divide it.

  - Intrinsic equity value is the value of the pie that remains for
    owners, after the costs of debt have been subtracted. Free cash
    flows to equity tell you if there will be enough cash flow to
    satisfy fixed debt repayment obligations for interest and principal
    repayment that comes from debt. Intrinsic value comes before market
    price. You must know what something is worth to you before you
    contemplate selling it to someone else.

  - Always seek to maximize the intrinsic value of the firm first. Then
    see how financing can increase the intrinsic value of your equity.
    Then, and only then, see if the market will pay you a price that is
    more than you think the future cash flows are worth. Even with the
    best financial modeling skills, predicting the future is an inexact
    science.

  - Your balance sheets should balance and your cash flow projections
    should be mathematically correct. But far more important than
    precision is asking the right questions and using judgment to get
    “close enough.” This is no excuse for sloppy work. But, likewise,
    modeling skills are no substitute for the far rarer and more
    valuable gift of business judgment. You most have both modeling
    skills and real-world judgment.

