# Pricing Strategies & The Seasons of Entrepreneurship

## Season One: Startup

In startup season, just remaining in business is Priority One. What does
that mean? It means focusing on every single customer and every single
unit sold.

It's simple: You need revenue and you need it now---you've got
fixed-period costs (FPC) like rent and payroll to cover. And in order to
cover those costs effectively, you've got to get the price right.

Ask yourself, "Am I attracting an inferior group of customers who are
trained to ask for discounts?" And, "How will discounts like these
affect contribution to my fixed-period costs and my progress toward
breakeven?" Having to say "no" to any sale this early
is---obviously---tough. But it's necessary. And think about this, too:
How's the temptation to discount a symptom of a larger problem? Is the
real problem that you haven't found customers who are willing to pay for
the value you provide? If so, that needs to be addressed now, before you
go any farther.

![](media/image2.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.94375in"}

## Season Two: Shifting Focus to the Segments That Make a Market

Now your pricing strategy must shift its focus from individual units and
customers to segments: groups of customers who share common
characteristics. Pricing is no longer a matter of your judgment on a
case-by-case basis---you need more standardized policies that others can
execute.

Decision time: When you've divided customers into segments, which
segment should you commit your pricing strategy? The one that will pay
the most? The one that will buy the most? Both?

## Skim or penetrate?

During startup, you priced high to reach breakeven quickly (or, in a
less likely and more risky scenario, you priced low to attract lots of
early customers to cover high fixed-period costs). But now it's time to
decide what your pricing strategy will look like long term.

Do you price high to skim the customer segments who place the highest
value on your product, or do you price low to penetrate, to capture as
much of the market as possible? Let's stick with the water example to
illustrate.

![](media/image3.tiff){width="3.597014435695538in"


## Pricing High (Skimming)

By pricing high, you'd capture most of the value in serving a single
glass of water to the dying millionaire, but the price is far above the
value (maximum benefit) perceived by the other segments, so you'll only
sell one glass.

## Pricing Low (Penetrating)

By pricing low, you'll need to sell as many units as possible across all
the segments. But pricing low means giving the customers in segments A,
B, and C a disproportionately large amount of the value added.

![](media/image4.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.6180555555555554in"}

### Why not just charge different segments different prices?

Charging different customers different prices is easier if you are the
only salesperson, making snap judgments about each customer. It becomes
complicated and difficult to execute when you try to codify this
judgment to pass along to salesman and other employees.

**An important tradeoff this season: early payout or long-term
profits?**

Season two is about making strategic decisions, one segment at a time.
But reaching these segments---to advertise and educate them about the
benefits of your product---often requires expensive investments in
marketing and direct-sales forces, which in turn means charging higher
prices to fund these efforts. But, at the same time, you want to keep
prices low to encourage more early trial. But, without massive volume,
pricing low might not give you the cash you need to encourage early
trial to begin with.

But pricing low and spending a great deal on marketing means risking
large amounts of money to fund losses on a product that may never sell
enough units to reach breakeven or payout. Likewise, pricing high and
not investing in sales and marketing may lead to failure because
uneducated customers are unwilling to pay a high price for unknown
benefits

[The bottom line? As you segment and price, be sure to account for the
time and money it'll take to reach those segments.]{.underline}

![](media/image5.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.9972222222222222in"}

### So, price aside, how should you go about segmenting?

You could approach segmenting in two different ways: 1) by focusing your
portfolio of products and services and how they satisfy customers in
various ways, or 2) by targeting the customer buying experience

__Segmenting by Products and Services__

Customer needs usually fall into the following categories. Ask yourself
how your product or services stacks up in each:

-   Performance. How well does your product or service deliver on
    particular promises in ways that can be measured?

-   Image. How does it change the way customers feel about themselves?

-   Risk. Does the buyer face any risk by purchasing your product? If
    so, how can this be lowered or eliminated?

-   Simplicity. Is your product easy to understand?

-   Convenience and availability. Is it easy to find and buy?


__The Customer Buying Experience__

Another way to segment is through the way a customer buys and uses the
product and service. For example, your customer's experience with your
product is likely to include the following steps:

-   Research, costing, pricing, and planning a purchase

-   Purchasing/ordering

-   Delivery

-   Use

-   Billing

-   Post-sale services

No matter how well you segment your customers, soon competitors will
begin to court those at the margins, those who don't quite "fit." The
next section describes how to adapt your products and strategies
when---and hopefully before---competitors come knocking.

## Season Three: Maturity and Beyond

It's no longer about the unit-by-unit, customer-by-customer focus of
startup. And it's no longer just about segmenting.

You're now at a precarious juncture when it comes to pricing. With
competitors and substitutes in the mix, your products or services will
begin to feel the magnetic tug toward commoditization---despite how good
and unique you think your products portfolio is. You could begin
discounting to regain or maintain customers who are beginning to look
elsewhere. But you faced a similar dilemma about discounting during
startup, didn't you?

It's time to take action. And that means revisiting your pricing and
segmenting strategies.

### The risk of marginal pricing

There are at least three ways to resist commoditization and having to
price low, almost all of which require re-segmenting customers and
products and ranking them based on profitability.

#### **Rank customers based on profitability**

You can calculate the profitability of each customer, or even each
order, if you look for situations where you are delivering a high
benefit for a low price. Either raise prices on these already
high-profit customers or target more of them. And most importantly,
"fire" the low profitability customers to make way for more profitable
customers. This way you won't have to add capacity. Refocus your sales
on these more desirable customers: get close to them, build and renew
trust, provide them with more and more complex and important offerings.

#### **Rank products and orders based on profitability**

You can also look more closely at the buying process. Which of your
products is providing the most customer value, and where in its purchase
cycle is the value the highest? Once identified, improve upon those best
products and perfect the stages of the buying process that carry the
most value. Bring up to speed the stages that bring the lowest value.
And always try to move to deliver more for less

**Remember:** Pricing is not a matter of deciding what amount you want
to demand for a product or service, but a matter of creating and sharing
value with customers. You want to constantly look for ways to create
more value, not quibble over negotiating for a smaller and smaller share
of a shrinking value pie.

#### **Rank channels based on profitability**

Which channels are bringing the most profit and growth? Rank your most
profitable with your least---like you did with customer segments---and
focus on expanding the most profitable ones. Watch out: If increasing
sales are coming from a low-margin channel like Walmart, soon average
profits as a percentage of revenues will start to decline


![](media/image6.tiff){width="6.5in" height="2.066666666666667in"}

## Summary

Your pricing strategy changes throughout the entrepreneurial seasons. In
the startup season, pricing is a matter of talking customer by customer
and measuring unit by unit the contribution that is made toward
fixed-period costs, all in a frantic effort to reach breakeven. If you
reach breakeven, the role of pricing changes. Now you have gathered
enough data on different customer segments to decide which segments to
pursue and in what order. Your goals shift from mere survival to
accelerating payout and maximizing profits (which often are in conflict)
and you now group individual customers into segments, so you can develop
standardized processes and routines to serve them more efficiently.

These processes and routines---built segment by segment through trial
and error---will become the source of your competitive advantage: your
differentiation. In the final season, you will face the entropy of
success: Complacency. Too much complexity. Growing overhead. Once again
it is time to refocus customer by customer, product by product,
experience by experience to look for areas to add a great deal of value,
for as little cost as possible.


