
# Processes 101

## What is a process and why is it important for entrepreneurs?

A process is a series of steps that converts a raw material into a good
or service valued by a customer, by adding labor, energy, and ingenuity.
Processes are important for entrepreneurs because dividing a more
complex task into smaller steps enables the creation of value to be
standardized---which allows an individual worker to specialize and learn
to do an individual task better, cheaper, and faster over time. With
each task in your process specialized, you can hire lower cost labor or
even purchase a machine to automate the task.

![](media/image2.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.9430555555555555in"}

## Creating a Process

1\. Define the Customer Need

2\. Designing: Choose which part of the process you will own

3\. Designing: Chart the steps you will control

4\. Execute your process in the real world

5\. Continually improve

## Process Mapping

Being able to describe, order, chart, and measure individual tasks and
overall processes is a critical skill for entrepreneurs. That means
learning, practicing with, and becoming fluent in the symbols and
conventions of Process Flow Diagrams (or Process Maps), which allow you
to describe and measure a process on paper---and share it with managers
and others---before you try it for real.

Here's a brief vocabulary lesson in the language of Process Flow
Diagrams:

A rectangle represents a single **Task** in the process. A task is
completed at a **workstation** where energy or labor is used to
transform a material or deliver a service. Usually there is a worker in
charge of doing the work, sometimes with the aid of some equipment.
Sometimes tasks are **automated** and do not require a worker.

A solid arrow shows the direction of **Materials Flow**. Materials are
either raw materials or semi-finished products or services. These flows
should mimic as closely as possible how real materials will flow on the
shop floor of your business.

A dashed arrow shows **Information Flow.** Information flow can be as
important in a process as material flow or tasks. Workers need to
communicate with one another to move the proper amount of materials
along in the process, shape raw materials into useful products that
conform to a customer's specifications, or signal a flaw that needs to
be repaired.

An inverted triangle shows temporary storage of material as it waits in
queue to move to the next step in the process. There are three types of
**Inventory**.

Raw Materials WIP Finished Goods

1\. **Raw Materials** are inputs of material into the process.

2\. **Work in Process (WIP)** means units of production that have been
partially, but not completely, transformed from Raw Materials into
Finished Goods and are temporarily stored in a queue awaiting the next
step in the process.

3\. **Finished Goods (FGI)** are final products that have been completely
transformed by 8 the process and are ready for delivery to the customer.

## 3 Types of Processes:

-   [Serial Process]{.underline} is simply a series of tasks that are
    completed in sequence.

-   [Parallel Process]{.underline} is when the exact same task is done
    simultaneously by two or more workstations at the same time, to
    divide the flow into multiple streams. Parallel workstations make
    sense when it's not cheaper to use a larger machine.

-   [Batch Process]{.underline} means that a group of products are all
    acted on by a workstation at once, rather than one at a time.

## Process Metrics

The most important measures of the performance of your operation are:

• [Reliability.]{.underline} How effective are you at making units that
meet specification?

• [Flexibility.]{.underline} How much variability can your process
handle?

• [Capacity.]{.underline} How many units can you produce in a given time
period?

• [Lead-time.]{.underline} How long does it take for a customer's order
to be filled?

• [Overall investment.]{.underline} How much money, including equipment,
inventory, etc., is tied up in the line?

**[Some Definitions]{.underline}**

**Capacity**

How many units (on average) could a given workstation transform in a
period of time? Capacity is important because the overall process
capacity will be constrained by the workstation with the lowest
capacity.

**Output**

How many actual units did a given workstation actually transform in a
period of time, given that the process didn't work exactly as expected?
Actual output is important because it shows how well the workstation is
performing in reality versus what it theoretically could produce.

**Process Time**

How long does it take to transform inputs into one unit of output at a
given workstation? The process time of a task is important because the
sum of all process times from start to finish, will determine how long a
customer must wait before their product is delivered.

**Cycle Time**

How frequently are units completed at a particular process stage? For a
workstation with two workers performing tasks in parallel, the cycle
time will be 50 percent of what it would be with only one worker
performing the task. In general, the equation for calculating cycle time
for a workstation is:

**(Task process time per unit) / (\# of Tasks in Parallel at
Workstation)**

Cycle time is important for an entrepreneur to understand, because cycle
time tells you for a given period of time how many units are being
produced at this workstation. The cycle time for the process as a whole
is the same as the cycle time of the individual component process (or
processes) with the greatest cycle time -- also known as the
"bottleneck" process.

[See below: Capacity & Cycle Time: An Inverse Relationship]{.underline}

![](media/image21.tiff){width="6.345565398075241in"
height="3.032450787401575in"}

**Idle Time**

A workstation which does not have any work-in-process inventory
available to be transformed is experiencing idle time. Idle time
represents unused capacity at the workstation. Too much idle time at a
workstation is a waste of resources. Depending on the needs of the
overall process, you might seek to increase the availability of
work-in-process inventory at the workstation so there is less idle time,
or you may reassign the idle worker to perform another task.

So when a workstation is experiencing idle time, it is operating at less
than 100 percent capacity (this isn't necessarily a bad thing). A useful
way to measure the productivity of a workstation is **capacity
utilization.** To calculate the capacity utilization for a workstation
for a given time period, simply divide the actual production output by
the expected capacity.

For example, if a workstation is capable of transforming 50 units per
hour, but is only able to produce 30 units per hour due to idle time,
then the capacity utilization for the workstation is: Capability
Utilization = (Actual Output)/(Expected Capacity) = (30 units)/(50
units) = 0.60 = 60%

**Wait Time**

The amount of time that the unit being transformed has to wait in queue
prior to entering the next workstation is referred to as wait time. Wait
time is important to calculate because a unit waiting is a unit that is
not being converted into money from sales.

**Lead-Time**

Lead-time is an important measure of your process. The simplest
definition is that lead-time is the total elapsed time from when a
request is made to when the request is filled.

**Process Balance**

-   A process is balanced when the capacities of each process stage are
    closely matched, resulting in a minimum of idle time for the
    workstations and a minimum amount of wait time for WIP inventory.

-   However, once your line is up and running, balancing the capacities
    of each process stage is not a critical goal. Once your real-world
    line is running, you should focus on finding and eliminating
    bottlenecks.

## Bottlenecks: An Important Limiting Factor

![](media/image22.tiff){width="6.5in" height="1.3444444444444446in"}

## Conclusion

You start your business with a product idea and a plan for how you will
operate. You want to deliver the right product, at the right time, at
the right cost. But as soon as you start operating, you realize that
your processes can be improved. Your process doesn't work exactly how
you expected, customers behave in ways that you didn't anticipate, and
you must change your process or your product to take advantage of this
new information.

Using a process map, you can identify and measure each step in the
process. This enables you to find the step in your prcess where making a
small change might make a big difference.

As a bootstrap entrepreneur, you'll want to standardize tasks and
delegate them. It's easier to hire and train someone, when their job
task is simplified and clearly defined.

By measureing each step in your process, you can also identify your
bottleneck -- the resource in your process with the lowest capacity.
This will be an important tool you will use later to find and fix the
step in your process that is keeping you from producing units even
better, faster, or cheaper.

