# Queuing Theory

**The Psychology of Waiting In Lines**

The 1<sup>st</sup> & 2<sup>nd</sup> Laws of service:

**1<sup>st</sup> law of service**

Satisfaction = Perception minus Expectation

(under promise – over deliver)

**2<sup>nd</sup> law of service**

Its hard to play catch-up ball

(if they sit down in a good mood, its easy to keep them happy, if they
sit down disgruntled, its almost impossible to turn them around)

**The Principles of Waiting**

Having established the importance of perceptions and expectations in the
experience of waiting we now turn to a series of propositions about the
psychology of queus, each of which can be used by service organizaions
to influence their customers’ satisfaction with waiting times. These
propositions are:

1.  Unoccupied Time Feels Longer Than Occupied Time

2.  Pre-Process Waits Feel Longer than In-Process Waits

3.  Anxiety Makes Waits Seem Longer

4.  Uncertain Waits Are Longer than Known, Finite Waits

5.  Unexplained Waits are longer than Explained Waits

6.  Unfair Waits Are Longer Than Equitable Waits

7.  The More Valuable the Service, The Longer I Will Wait

8.  Solo Waiting Feels Longer Than Group Waiting

**Note On the Management Of Queues**

***Measuring Queue Behavior***

How does one measure the performance of a queuing system? From the point
of view of the customer? From the point of view of management? From the
point of view of the workforce? These are the questions explored in this
section.

One of the most obvious performance characteristics of a queuing system
is the waiting time. Another aspect of the queuing system that may be of
interest is the number of customers waiting (the length of the queue).
Customers (and management) are interested not only in waiting time, but
also in the time it takes to be served (the "service time"). The sum of
the time a person must wait before beginning service and the time for
the person to receive the service is called the "total time in the
system." Another dimension of the queuing system of interest to
management (and the workforce) is the utilization of the service
facilities. Management (and staff) will also be interested in the
service times (or rate of service, measured by number of customers
served per hour or per day). While this is often treated as a "design
input" of the system (i.e. as a given number), it can also be viewed as
a performance characteristic.

***Types of Queues***

![](./media/image40.png)

A multiple-stage situation is distinguished by the fact that when
customers enter the system, they need to be served by more than one
separate facility before departing the system.

In contrast, a single-stage queue might be illustrated by the typical
operation of a McDonald's store. The customer joins the waiting line
until reaching the server. The server then takes care of all of the
customer's needs, and the customer "departs" to eat the meal. Unlike at
Au Bon Pain, the individual server at the counter does not take another
order until the customer being served leaves the system.

![](./media/image41.png)

There is a famous maxim, sometimes known as "Erma Bombeck's Law," which
says: The other line always moves faster. In the system depicted above,
the consumer must enter the store and choose which line to join.
Sometimes, one may be allowed to switch lines; at other times, customers
must adhere to their first choice. Because of the frustrations that such
systems can have, institutions such as banks and airlines have installed
facilities so that all arriving customers join a single line and are
directed to the first available server.

![](./media/image42.png)

Queue disciplines are one of the prime managerial tools available to
affect the behavior of the system. Consider, for example, a street
intersection, which has one serving facility (the intersection) but (up
to) four waiting lines. <span class="underline">The "managerial" problem
here is to determine the "best" queue discipline: how long the traffic
lights should show green in each direction</span>. A similar problem is
faced at a one runway airport with one line of aircraft waiting to take
off and another waiting to land.

Another example of queue discipline being used to manage a queuing
situation is provided by special service lines at check-out counters in
supermarkets, where customers with eight items or less (or some such
number) may choose the "express" line.

![](./media/image43.png)

***The Behavior of Simple Systems***

"Queuing theory" is a branch of mathematics that can be used to predict
the behavior of queuing systems given certain assumptions. Beyond the
simplest cases, the formulae that queuing theory provides are often very
complex and it is usual in most real-world situations to employ (custom
designed) simulation models to study the behavior of individual queuing
situations.

![](./media/image44.png)

***The Management of Queues***

In this final section we shall return to the real world, and consider
some of the practical tools that are available to managers in order to
affect the behavior of their queuing systems. Many of these tools have
already been noted: the number of channels may be changed by adding (or
closing) serving facilities. This is done on a regular basis by
supermarkets (and banks) that vary the number of check-out counters (or
tellers) open to match the different arrival rates during the day. It is
also possible to speed up the system by separating customers into more
homogenous groups, who may be attended to by “specialists” dedicated to
the particular needs of each group (consider separate lines for
customers with and without tickets at the checking counters of many
airlines).

Related to the separation of different service facilities is the tool of
"pre-processing the line." In order to separate and direct customers to
the appropriate facility, airlines often employ individuals to walk up
and down waiting lines at airports, answering questions for those that
seek only information, issuing baggage checks and so on. This has the
effect of limiting the number of tasks to be performed by the agent at
the desk.

Management can try to decrease the average service time by additional
training or staffing at each service facility. It is also possible to
manage queues by eliminating certain services at peak times: some
restaurants will only prepare certain (complicated) dishes at off-peak
times. As we saw in the previous section, reducing the average service
time is one of the most powerful (and direct) means of reducing waiting
time.

Apart from these actions of changing the objective performance of the
system, management should also recognize that waiting is as much a
psychological activity as it is a physical one, and that many techniques
are available to take advantage of this fact.

Rather than "hide" the length of the line, other service organizations
may prefer to be explicit about the expected waiting time, on the theory
that customer frustration at having to wait longer then "expected" may
affect perception of the overall level of service offered.

Another approach to queue management is to control the pattern of
arrivals before they appear in the system. Techniques range from
peak-pricing (charging less for customers who arrive in off-peak
periods) to appointment systems.

**Summary**

Customers' experience with waiting lines can be an important determinant
of their overall perceptions of service, regardless of how well they are
treated in the rest of the service system. The operating characteristics
of queuing systems can be measured in many different ways; managers must
have a clear idea of what dimensions of performance are most important
if they are to design and control the "optimum" system.

