# The Goal

The Goal is a management-oriented novel by Eliyahu M. Goldratt, a business consultant known for his Theory of Constraints, and Jeff Cox, a best selling author and co-author of multiple management-oriented novels. The Goal was originally published in 1984 and has since been revised and republished. This book can be used for case studies in operations management, with a focus geared towards the Theory of Constraints, bottlenecks and how to alleviate them, and applications of these concepts in real life. It is used in management colleges to teach students about the importance of strategic capacity planning and constraint management. Time Magazine listed the book as one of "The 25 Most Influential Business Management Books. - from [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Goal_(novel))

## Summary

Chapter by Chapter Summary:[link](https://maaw.info/ArticleSummaries/ArtSumTheGoal.htm)

### Key Training Points:
- How to identify and deal with system bottlenecks
- How to measure the impact and viability of new ideas
- How to rally your team behind the improvement process
- How to revisit the entire process to facilitate ongoing improvement


## Audiobook

The 9-Part Audiobook on Youtube: [link](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLc90HBKVSF-DjGb4nUi-fHxy874TdfUYk)

**W2/W4: The Goal**

What is the goal? 

To Increase throughput while simultaneously decreasing inventory and
operating expenses.

-   Throughput: the rate at which the system generates money through
    sales (the money coming in)

-   Inventory: all the money invested in things it intends to sell
    (money in the system)

-   Operating Expenses: the money spent to turn inventory into
    throughput (money you pay to make throughput happen)

For it to be spending time on output that's already You could think
you're running an efficient system, but your thinking might be
wrong. **If you didn't increase sales, throughput, or decrease costs,
you didn't increase productivity**. 

If you don't know what the real goal is, which you could very well be
wrong about, then you can't figure out what to do to reach the goal.
And **the goal of any business is to make money**. 

If you keep everyone and everything working at full capacity, you'll
naturally build up inventory by creating excess work. A plant where
everyone is working all the time is very inefficient. You can't have a
"balanced plant" without doing excess work. 

Because of **dependent events** and **statistical fluctuations**, you'll
naturally run into **bottlenecks** in the system, kind of like the
fattest kid on a hike slowing everyone down. **The whole system only
moves as fast as the bottleneck**, so it makes sense to focus on
increasing the bottleneck's capacity and tying the rest of the system's
rate to the rate of the bottleneck. In the analogy, put the fat kid at
the front of the line, and make his backpack as light as possible so he
can walk faster. 

Since **output can only deviate up to the maximum level determined by
its dependent events**, but it can deviate down much lower, with
successive dependent events you'll get further and further negative
fluctuations. A kid can come to a halt, but he can only catch up as much
as the kid in front of him, he can never catch up past the point the
previous kid has already walked. 

**Bottleneck:** "A bottleneck is any resource whose capacity is equal to
or *less than* the demand placed upon it. And a non-bottleneck is any
resource whose capacity is greater than the demand placed on it."
\[139\]

**An easy way to find a bottleneck is to look and see what has a big
pile of work in front of it** \[144\]

**To optimize the system, make the flow through the bottleneck equal to
the demand from the market**. Or, a tiny bit less than the demand from
the market. \[139\]

**In most cases you'll have capacity that is hidden from you because
some of your thinking is incorrect**. The first thing you should always
do is see exactly how the bottlenecks are currently operating, and if
you can change how they're used to increase their capacity (before
simply hiring or buying more tools). \[152\]

**If you lose even one hour on the bottleneck, you have lost it forever.
You can't get it back somewhere else in the system**. Your throughput
for the entire system will be lower by whatever amount the bottleneck
produces in that time. \[153\]

Lost time on the bottleneck is lost throughput which means you've lost
the *total output of the whole system*. **If your whole plant earns
\$1,000 an hour, then an hour lost on the bottleneck is \$1,000 lost**.
Make sure it's time isn't wasted by: \[157 / 159\]

-   Sitting idle and not getting used during some break

-   Making it work on something you don't need

You can increase the capacity of the bottleneck by: \[159\]

-   Only making it work on what will increase throughput *today*

-   Taking some of the load off the bottleneck and giving it to
    non-bottlenecks

When you make a non-bottleneck do more work than the bottleneck, you
create excess inventory and thus lose money. \[210\]

What you have to do is **figure out how to release materials at the
start of the process exactly according to the capacity of the
bottleneck**. \[216\]

**If you** **reduce your batch size, you increase throughput** **by
reducing inventory held and reducing the amount of cash tied up at any
one time.** It also lets you move faster, since the gaps will be smaller
since the time to process a batch will be lowered as well, and your
total lead time on any project condenses. \[232\]

**Three simple questions:** What to change, what to change to, and how
to cause the change. \[337\]

