# Working Capital in Complex Businesses

**Forecasting Working Capital Changes in Complex, Capital Intensive
Businesses with Long Cash Cycles**

Suddenly, customer orders increase at your business. So you just call
the shop foreman and ask him to order more raw materials to increase
production. Simple, right? But you find yourself waiting and waiting and
waiting for production to increase. As you wait, you begin to notice
that the cash in your bank account is slipping slowly towards zero. What
has gone wrong?

Welcome to a company with a long “cash cycle,” the time between the
purchase of raw materials and collection of accounts receivable. Not
only can the time lags in such a business be difficult to account
for—especially if you have many different types of products, each with
its own production process and cash cycle—they can bankrupt you if you
don’t understand how to account for them.

The purpose of this note is to warn you about working capital surges in
companies with long cash cycles and to give you an introduction to tools
that will help you account for them.

***Projecting Inventory Levels***

Projecting inventory levels begins with the sales funnel. Understanding
how many prospects are at each stage of the funnel, how likely they are
to convert, and how long the process takes to generate an order will
help you establish a demand forecast. The next step is to work backwards
through the manufacturing process to see when raw materials must be
purchased in order to meet expected demand.

***Visualizing Working Capital Investment***

As this “slug” of new production works its way through the system,
working capital increases.

Another way to look at working capital is the total net working capital
carried on the balance sheet (i.e., not just changes). Companies that
experience predictable peaks in demand each year are often forced to
cope with seasonal inventory build-ups by tapping a revolving line of
credit. Assuming the business is able to sell the inventory at a profit,
it can use the proceeds to pay down the revolver.

**<span class="underline">Summary</span>**

Controlling working capital in such a business is as much an art as a
science. It begins by having a good idea of how much in costs,
investments, and time it takes to fill each order, then pricing and
making delivery promises accordingly. Total Net Working Capital & Units
Delivered 7 At the very least, when running a business with high working
capital needs and a long sales cycle, you need to understand that each
change in revenues will set off a tsunami of working capital that will
work its way from raw materials through delivery. Your job is to have
enough cash on hand (or access to credit) to handle any unexpected
surges in working capital needs, so the business doesn’t run out of cash
and die.
